Introduced in 1978 as a 16-bit extension of the 8-bit 8008, the 8086 is the foundation of the x86 family. During the personal computing boom, users wanted to be assured that programs that ran on their old PC would run on a new one, so this microarchitecture began the nearly 50-year x86 tradition of backwards compatibility - to this day, x86 chips boot in [[x86-real-mode]] to allow programs written for 8086 to run.

The 8086 is a "16 bit processor". What this means is that all its registers are 16 bits, as well as all internal and external *data* busses. The external *address* bus, however, provides a 20-bit address space.

**why does the 8086 have a 20-bit external address bus if everything else is 16 bits?**
At the time, programs were beginning to have trouble with the limited address space provided by 16 bits (64KiB). The only way around this was external bank switching, which has additional overhead. Instead, Intel introduced *segmentation*, which uses two 16 bit registers to allow addressing the full 20-bit address space.

Lets think about this for a second. How would you design the ISA to allow for accessing a 20 bit address space when all registers are 16 bits? One way, which seems the obvious one to me, is to simply concatenate one register with the other to form a 32-bit address. There is one problem with this - this allows programs to form invalid addresses starting at `0x00100000` and above by loading a value greater than `0x0010` in the register holding the upper address bits.

Instead, Intel went with the following: shift the segment four bits to the left (multiply by 16), and add it to the offset. Now do your worst and load `0xFFFF` into the upper register and you will just get `0xFFFF0 + 0xFFFF = 0x0010FFEF`. Wait a second - isnt that more than `0x00100000`? Yup. You can technically access about 64KB (`0xFFEF=65519`) of address space above the 20-bit address space given by the pins on the CPU! In fact, this is noted as a *feature* in the original 8086 manual (see [Page 35 here](http://bitsavers.org/components/intel/8086/9800722-03_The_8086_Family_Users_Manual_Oct79.pdf))

This mini address space beyond the edge of the world is called [High Memory](https://wiki.osdev.org/Real_Mode#High_Memory_Area); its actual effect on 8086 CPUs was to simply wrap around to 0. And here we encounter one of many interesting compatibility quirks: [[high-memory-x86-a20]]


# Segmentation
Segmentation *also* has the benefit of allowing programs to be *dynamically relocatable*. The 8086 was designed for multiprocessing systems; all the executing programs couldnt fit in memory at the same time. Instead, you could simply write a program to disk when not in use, then reload it later - all you need to do is update the segment registers appropriately. For this to work, the program must not write its segment registers, and must not transfer to code outside its code segment.

The original plan here was that the "generous" (yes, a real quote from the manual) segment size of 64KiB would be enough for the entire program to fit.